>> Ifill: WARNING SHOTS WERE
FIRED IN THE STREETS OF UKRAINE,
AND IN TOUGH RHETORIC FROM
LEADERS IN MOSCOW, WASHINGTON
AND KIEV, AS THE U.S. CALLED ON
RUSSIA TO STEP BACK FROM WHAT IT
NOW CALLS AN ACT OF AGGRESSION.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA UNVEILS HIS NEW
BUDGET BLUEPRINT, LAYING THE
GROUNDWORK FOR POLITICAL BATTLES
OVER HOW TO CLOSE THE COUNTRY'S
ECONOMIC GAPS.
>> Ifill: PLUS...
>> WITH THIS APP, WE CAN MAKE
BETTER DECISIONS AND MAYBE IN
THE FUTURE I THINK WE CAN CHANGE
THE WORLD WITH THIS GAME.
>> Ifill: THE CALIFORNIA PROGRAM
INTRODUCING YOUNG MEN TO THE
WORLD OF HACK-A-THONS AND TECH
STARTUPS, TRAINING THEM TO
BECOME THE APP DEVELOPERS OF
TOMORROW.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENT OF
RUSSIA SPOKE OUT TODAY ON THE
UKRAINE CRISIS, FOR THE FIRST
TIME SINCE EFFECTIVELY TAKING
OVER CRIMEA.
VLADIMIR PUTIN ALTERNATELY
DEFENDED HIS COUNTRY'S ACTIONS,
AND TRIED TO EASE INTERNATIONAL
CONCERNS, ON A DAY OF
CONFLICTING SIGNALS.
>> Woodruff: IN CRIMEA, RUSSIAN
FORCES OCCUPYING AN AIR BASE,
FIRED WARNING SHOTS TODAY TO
DISPERSE UNARMED UKRAINIAN
SERVICEMEN.
IN MOSCOW, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN SAID THE
SITUATION IS GRADUALLY
STABILIZING.
HE INSISTED THAT LOCAL SELF-
DEFENSE FORCES, NOT RUSSIAN
TROOPS, HAD SEIZED
UKRAINIAN BASES.
AND HE ANNOUNCED AN END TO
MILITARY EXERCISES IN WESTERN
RUSSIA.
STILL, HE INSISTED HIS
GOVERNMENT RESERVES THE RIGHT TO
USE FORCE TO PROTECT ETHNIC
RUSSIANS IN UKRAINE.
>> Reporter: IF WE SEE THAT
LAWLESSNESS STARTING IN EASTERN
REGIONS TOO, IF PEOPLE ASK USFOP
WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO USE ALL
OPTIONS AT OUR DISPOSAL TO
PROTECT THOSE CITIZENS.
>> Woodruff: ON POLITICS, THE
RUSSIAN LEADER SAID
VIKTOR YANUKOVICH IS THE
LEGITIMATE PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE
BUT ACKNOWLEDGED HE HAS NO
POLITICAL FUTURE.
AND PUTIN SUGGESTED MOSCOW MIGHT
REJECT THE RESULTS OF ANY NEW
ELECTIONS.
>> Reporter: IT DEPENDS ON HOW
THEY WILL BE HELD.
IF THEY ARE HELD IN THE SAME
TERROR THAT WE SEE NOW IN KIEV,
THEN WE WON'T RECOGNIZE.
>> Woodruff: IN WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT OBAMA FLATLY REJECTED
PUTIN'S JUSTIFICATIONS FOR
RUSSIA'S ACTIONS.
>> PRESIDENT PUTIN SEEMS TO HAVE
DIFFERENT SET OF LAWYERS MAKING
DIFFERENT SET OF
INTERPRETATIONS.
BUT I DON'T THINK THAT'S FOOLING
ANYBODY.
I THINK EVERYBODY RECOGNIZES
THAT ALTHOUGH RUSSIA HAS
LEGITIMATE INTERESTS IN WHAT
HAPPENS IN NEIGHBORING STATE,
THAT DOES NOT GIVE IT THE RIGHT
TO USE FORCE AS A MEANS OF
EXERTING INFLUENCE IN THAT STATE
>> Woodruff: UKRAINE'S NEW PRIME
MINISTER, SPEAKING IN KIEV, ALSO
DEMANDED THE RUSSIANS BACK OFF,
WHILE ANNOUNCING THE TWO SIDES
ARE NOW TALKING.
>> Reporter: WE ARE ONCE AGAIN
CALLING ON RUSSIA TO STOP
MILITARY AGGRESSION ON THE
TERRITORY OF UKRAINE.
UKRAINE IS READY TO RENEW AND
MODERATE A NEW STYLE OF
RELATIONS.
WE HAVE BEGUN CONSULTATIONS AT
THE MINISTERIAL LEVEL BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENTS OF UKRAINE AND
RUSSIA.
>> THANK YOU!
THANK YOU!
>> Woodruff: ALL OF THIS, AS
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
ARRIVED IN KIEV'S FOGGY
INDEPENDENCE SQUARE, PAYING
TRIBUTE TO PROTESTERS WHO DIED
IN SNIPER ATTACKS.
HE CONDEMNED WHAT HE CALLED
RUSSIA'S ACT OF AGGRESSION.
>> IT IS NOT APPROPRIATE TO
INVADE A COUNTRY AND, AT THE END
OF A BARREL OF A GUN, DICTATE
WHAT YOU ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE.
>> Woodruff: KERRY ALSO MET WITH
UKRAINE'S INTERIM LEADERS, AND
ANNOUNCED A $1 BILLION ECONOMIC
PACKAGE FOR THE NEW GOVERNMENT.
MEANWHILE, THERE WAS MORE TALK
IN THE WEST OF IMPOSING
SANCTIONS ON RUSSIA.
EVEN AS MOSCOW WARNED IT WOULD
RETALIATE.
FOREIGN MINISTER SERGEI LAVROV
SPOKE DURING A VISIT TO TUNISIA.
>> ( translated ): ON OUR
SANCTIONS, I WILL NOT EVEN
EXAGGERATE, WE HAVE ALWAYS
OPPOSED UNILATERAL SANCTIONS.
THEY NEVER LEAD TO ANYTHING GOOD
AND I HOPE THAT OUR PARTNERS
UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS COUNTER-
PRODUCTIVE TO POLITICAL
ACTIVITY.
>> Woodruff: RUSSIA DID AGREE TO
MEET WITH NATO REPRESENTATIVES
TOMORROW, TO DISCUSS UKRAINE.
AND RUSSIAN AND WORLD MARKETS
ROSE ON THOSE DEVELOPMENTS, AND
PUTIN'S WORDS.
>> Woodruff: AMID THE TENSIONS
OVER UKRAINE, RUSSIA ANNOUNCED
TODAY IT SUCCESSFULLY TEST-FIRED
AN INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC
MISSILE.
IT SAID THE DUMMY WARHEAD HIT
ITS TARGET AT A PROVING GROUND
KAZINAKHSTAN.
WE'LL HEAR MUCH MORE ON THE
DAY'S DEVELOPMENTS, RIGHT AFTER
THE NEWS SUMMARY.
WALL STREET REBOUNDED TODAY AS
JITTERS OVER UKRAINE EASED.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED ALMOST 228 POINTS
TO CLOSE NEAR 16,396.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 74 POINTS TO
CLOSE JUST SHORT OF 4,352.
AND THE STANDARD AND POOR'S 500
WAS UP 28 POINTS, TO FINISH NEAR
1,874.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
ROLLED OUT HIS BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR,
TOTALING ALMOST  $4 TRILLION.
IT INCLUDES NEW TAX HIKES TO
OFFSET ADDITIONAL SPENDING FOR
EDUCATION AND JOB-TRAINING.
BUT REPUBLICANS SAY IT DOES
NOTHING TO ADDRESS THE NATION'S
FISCAL CHALLENGES.
WE'LL DISCUSS ITS APPROACH TO
HELPING LOW INCOME AMERICANS,
LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU IS WARNING THE U.S.
AND THE WORLD AGAINST LETTING
IRAN GO AHEAD WITH ANY PART OF
ITS NUCLEAR PROGRAM:
HE SPOKE IN WASHINGTON, A DAY
AFTER MEETING WITH PRESIDENT
OBAMA.
>> THE LEADING POWERS OF THE
WORLD ARE TALKING ABOUT LEAVING
IRAN WITH THE CAPABILITY TO
ENRICH URANIUM.HEY DON'T DO THAT
BECAUSE THAT WOULD BE A GRAVE
ERROR.
IT WOULD LEAVE IRAN AS A
THRESHOLD NUCLEAR POWER.
>> Woodruff: NETANYAHU ALSO SAID
THAT FAR FROM EASING SANCTIONS
ON IRAN, THE WORLD SHOULD
INCREASE THEM.
HE ALSO URGED THE PALESTINIANS
TO RECOGNIZE ISRAEL AS A JEWISH
STATE, IF THEY REALLY WANT
PEACE.
THE PROCESS OF REMOVING SYRIA'S
CHEMICAL WEAPONS IS PICKING UP
PACE.
THE DUTCH DIPLOMAT OVERSEEING
THE OPERATION SAID TODAY THE
ASSAD REGIME HAS HANDED OVER SIX
SHIPMENTS OF TOXIC AGENTS.
SHE SPOKE IN AMSTERDAM, AT THE
HEADQUARTERS OF THE ORGANIZATION
FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL
WEAPONS.
>> THE SYRIAN AUTHORITIES HAVE
SUBMITTED A REVISED PLAN WITH A
TIMETABLE OF AROUND 60 DAYS IN
ORDER TO ACCELERATE AND TO
INTENSIFY THEIR EFFORTS TO
ENSURE TIMELY REMOVAL FOR ONWARD
DESTRUCTION.
AS OF TODAY NEARLY ONE THIRD OF
SYRIA'S CHEMICAL WEAPONS
MATERIAL HAS BEEN REMOVED OR
DESTROYED INSIDE OF THE COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: SIGRID KAAG SAID
IT'S STILL POSSIBLE TO FINISH
DESTROYING ALL OF THE MATERIAL
BY THE END OF JUNE, UNDER A
U.N. AGREEMENT.
>> THE COURT MARSHALL OF A
U.S. ARMY GENERAL FOR SEXUAL
ASSAULT OPENED TODAY AT FORT
BRAGG, NORTH CAROLINA.
JEFFREY A SINCLAIR, BRIGADIER
GENERAL, BELIEVED TO BE THE MOST
SENIOR OFFICER EVER TO FACE
TRIAL FOR SEXUAL ASSAULT,
CHARGED WITH FORCING A FEMALE
CAPTAIN TO PERFORM SEX ACTS.
IF CONDUCTED FACES LIFE IN
PRISON.
>> Woodruff: A DEEP FREEZE
GRIPPED THE MID-ATLANTIC,
NORTHEAST AND PARTS OF THE
SOUTHERN UNITED STATES TODAY.
TEMPERATURES HIT THE SINGLE
DIGITS, WITH SOME AREAS
REPORTING RECORD LOWS FOR THE
MONTH OF MARCH.
SCHOOLS AND GOVERNMENT OFFICES
UP AND DOWN THE EAST COAST
REMAINED CLOSED, OR DELAYED, FOR
ANOTHER DAY.
THE ARCTIC CHILL ALSO TRIGGERED
A RARE SIGHT:  PARTS OF THE
CASCADING WATERS AT NIAGARA
FALLS, BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
CANADA, FROZE OVER.
>> Woodruff: BRAZIL'S CARNIVAL
SEASON CAME TO CLO ASE TODAY
AFTER DAYS OF EXTRAVAGANT
PARADES AND CELEBRATIONS.
IN RIO DE JANEIRO, COSTUMED
PERFORMERS DANCED BELOW MASSIVE
FLOATS THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT AND
WELL INTO THIS MORNING.
MEANWHILE IN NEW ORLEANS, MARDI
GRAS WAS A COLD, WET, GRAY DAY,
BUT REVELERS GATHERED IN THE
FRENCH QUARTER, JUST THE SAME.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
NEXT STEPS FOR THE U.S. IN THE
UKRAINE CRISIS; PRESIDENT OBAMA
MAKES CLOSING ECONOMIC GAPS A
BUDGET PRIORITY; WHAT'S BEHIND
THE SPIKE IN SUICIDES IN THE
U.S. MILITARY; PLUS, GIVING
YOUNG MEN THE SKILLS TO BECOME
TOMORROW'S COMPUTER CODERS.
>> Ifill: THE STANDOFF IN
UKRAINE, AND THE TENSION IT HAS
TRIGGERED BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
RUSSIA, HAS BECOME THE CENTRAL
FOREIGN POLICY CHALLENGE IN
WASHINGTON, IN MOSCOW AND IN
EUROPEAN CAPITALS.
HERE TO TAKE US BEHIND THE
SCENES: CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER.
MARGARET, WELCOME AGAIN.
WE SAW TODAY BETWEEN JOHN KERRY,
THE PRESIDENT SPOKE AND
ESPECIALLY VLADIMIR PUTIN, WHAT
DOES IT SIGNIFICANCE?
>> I CAN TELL YOU WHAT THE
ADMINISTRATION THOUGHT PUTIN HAD
TO SAY.
ON THE ONE HAND THE PRESS
REPORTS EMPHASIZE HIS TOUCH TALK
ABOUT HOW RUSSIA HAD A RIGHT TO
GO INTO UKRAINE TO PROTECT
RUSSIANS AND FELT HE WAS OUT OF
TOUCH WITH REALITY IN TERMS OF
DENYING RUSSIAN TROOPS ARE
THERE.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THEY SAW A
COUPLE OF GLIMMERS OF
ENCOURAGEMENT.
ONE, HE TALKED ABOUT ELECTIONS
COMING UP IN MAY WHICH IS WHAT
THE U.S. IS TALKING ABOUT.
TWO, HE ADMITTED YANUKOVICH
WALKED AWAY FROM POWER AND TOLD
HIM ON THE PHONE THE OTHER DAY
HE'LL NEVER WIN ANOTHER
ELECTION.
SEEMED TO BE IN CONFLICT.
AND TALKED ABOUT WANTING TO
ENGAGE.
SO LAST NIGHT WITH N A MEETING
BETWEEN THE RUSSIANS AND THE
GERMAN FOREIGN MINISTERS, THE
RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER HAD NO
INTEREST IN TAKING STEPS TO
STARTING THE RUSSIANS AND
UKRAINES TALKING.
>> Ifill: THERE'S A TALK ABOUT
SANCTIONS.
SECRETARY KERRY MENTIONED A
BILLION DOLLARS TODAY.
ARE THEY MOVING ANY CLOSER TO
REALITY?
>> THEY ARE.
AN OFFICIAL TRAVELING WITH
SECRETARY KERRY TALKED ABOUT THE
FACT THERE COULD BE SOMETHING
COMING AS EARLY AT NEXT WEEK.
THIS WEEK, I TALKED TO AIDE TO
SENATOR CORKEN, THERE'S A
MOVEMENT ON THE HILL THEY IMPOSE
SOME SANCTIONS.
THEY'RE TRYING TO GET THE
ADMINISTRATION IN ON THAT.
THE INTERESTING WORD ON
SANCTIONS CAME FROM GERMAN
OFFICIALS TODAY WHO SAID DESPITE
ALL THE STORIES ABOUT HOW
CHANCELLOR MERKEL IS MORE
RELUCTANT ON SANCTIONS THAN SOME
OF THE EUROPEANS, THEY SAID THE
PRIME MINISTER HAS A STATE
SUMMIT ON THURSDAY AND, IF THERE
IS NO MOVEMENT, NO CHANGE FROM
PUTIN, SANCTIONS WILL BE ON THEN
WOULD LIKE TO HAVE THE EUROPEANS
HAVE A CONCERTED FRONT, NOT ONE
BECAUSE THEY'RE MORE EFFECTIVE,
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS, ARE BUT,
TWO, FOR THE POLITICAL SIGNAL IT
SENDS.
>> Ifill: ARE THE EUROPEANS IN
LOCK STEP WITH THE U.S. ON THESE
KINDS OF THINGS?
>> NO, TO THE CONTRARY.
AS WE KNOW, EUROPE HAS MUCH
CLOSER TRADE TIES, THEY ARE MORE
DEPENDENT FOR EMERGENCY ON
RUSSIA.
RUSSIA IS A VERY NEAR NEIGHBOR
IF NOT A DIRECT NEIGHBOR.
ONE EUROPEAN OFFICIAL SAID TO
ME, IT'S A LITTLE DIFFERENT FOR
YOU ALL SITTING IN THE U.S.
RUSSIA DOESN'T REALLY LOOK LIKE
A DIRECT THREAT.
BUT IF YOU'RE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD -- YOU KNOW, THERE
ARE BOTH POSITIVE BENEFITS TO
ENGAGING WITH RUSSIA AND ALSO
THEOSTI HLITY THAT EXISTS THERE.
SO, NO, THEY'RE NOT ON THE SAME
PAGE, BUT I HEARD SECRETARY
KERRY SAY TODAYE H WAS QUITE
SURE THEY WOULD WORK IT
TOGETHER.
IN OTHER WORDS, IF THEY WOULD BE
IN AGREEMENT.
WHAT WE DON'T KNOW IS DOES THAT
MEAN THE ADMINISTRATION THINKS
THEY CAN BRING THE EUROPEANS
ALONG TO WHERE THEY ARE?
OR DOES IT MEAN THAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA IS WILLING TO SLOW HIS
PACE DOWN TO STICK WITH THE
EUROPEANS?
>> Ifill: HOW MUCH -- YOU
ALLUDED IN THE ANSWER TO THE
FIRST QUESTION, HOW MUCH DOES
THIS DEPEPPED ON THEIR
CONFIDENCE IN PUTIN'S MOTIVES,
THAT THEY TRULY BELIEVE AS
MERKEL HAS BEEN QUOTED AS SAYING
HE LOST IT?
>> THE GERMAN OFFICIALS WOULDN'T
CONFIRM SHE USED THOSE WORDS BUT
SAID THAT DOES REFLECT THE
GERMAN VIEW.
IT'S OBVIOUS FROM WHAT PUTIN
SAID TODAY, AMERICAN OFFICIALS
SAY, WELL, HOW DO YOU READ
PUTIN?
YOU CAN'T READ PUTIN.
OTHER THAN KNOWING HE'S AN ULTRA
NATIONALIST WHO WANTS TO RETAIN
OR ENLARGE THE RUSSIA SNPHERE OF
INFLUENCE IN HIS NEIGHBORHOOD,
THEY REALLY DON'T KNOW HOW TO
READ HIM, THEY'VE GIVEN UP.
WHAT IS CONCERNING TO HIM AND
EUROPEANS IS HE HAS THE BIT
BETWEEN HIS TEETH ON THIS ISSUE.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER LAVROV ON WHOM
SECRETARY KERRY SPENT A LOT OF
TIME DEVELOPING A RELATIONSHIP
WITH IN IRAN AND SYRIA TO SOME
DEGREE, THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO MEET
TOMORROW, THOUGH THAT'S NOT 100%
SET IN EUROPE, THERE IS A
CONCERN IN THE ADMINISTRATION
THAT LAVROV MAY NOT HAVE MUCH
ROOM TO MANEUVER.
>> Ifill: THIS IS PUTIN'S
BABY.
HOW FAR IS THE U.S. PREPARED TO
PUSH ON THIS?
>> THAT IS THE QUESTION.
>> Ifill: YEAH.
THIS IS A HYPOTHETICAL, SO I
COULDN'T GET ANYONE TO ENGAGE ON
IT.
LET'S SAY PUTIN SAYS, LOOK, I'M
NOT MOVING INTO SOUTHEASTERN
UKRAINE SHORT OF INCREDIBLE
PROVOCATION, WHICH HE SORT OF
HINTED THAT TODAY, BUT HE
RETAINS THE STATUS QUO IN CRIMEA
IN WHICH THE RUSSIAN TROOPS, HE
MAY CALL THEM IRREGULARS, BUT
THERE EAR RUSSIAN TROOPS OUTSIDE
THE BASES THEY'RE ALLOW.
DOES THE WORLD TREATY SAY CRIMEA
USED TO BELONG TO RUSSIA AND
IT'S DE FACTO AND WE HAVE TO
ACCEPT IT, FOR DO THE UNITED
STATES AND EUROPEANS CONTINUE TO
THEN SAY, WELL, WE'RE NOT GOING
TO SEND TROOPS IN BUT EXACT A
PRICE AND I THINK THAT REMAINS
TO BE DECIDED.
MARGARE>> Ifill: PARING MARGIN S
SO MUCH.
SO MANY QUESTIONS TO ANSWER.
>> Ifill: IS THIS A STANDOFF THE
U.S. SHOULD HAVE SEEN COMING?
AND WHAT ARE THE OPTIONS NOW?
FOR THAT WE GET TWO VIEWS.
JOHN MEARSHEIMER IS A PROFESSOR
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO AND
HAS WRITTEN EXTENSIVELY ON
STRATEGIC ISSUES.
AND AMY KNIGHT HAS AUTHORED
SEVERAL BOOKS ABOUT RUSSIAN
POLITICS AND HISTORY.
SHE ALSO WRITES FOR THE NEW YORK
REVIEW OF BOOKS.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
JOHN MEARSHEIMER, AS YOU SEE IT
NOW, WHAT ARE THE OPTIONS THAT
ARE AVAILABLE FOR THE U.S. OR
EUROPE OR RUSSIA?
>> WELL, THE FACT IS, WE HAVE
REMARKABLY FEW OPTIONS.
WE HAVE NO MILITARY OPTION AT
ALL.
EVEN JOHN McCAIN AND ALMOST
EVERY HAWK HAS SAID THAT THERE'S
NO MILITARY OPTION HERE.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE
ECONOMIC OPTIONS, THEY DO NOT
LOOK ATTRACTIVE AT ALL EITHER.
PEOPLE TALK ABOUT SANCTIONS, I
THINK IT'S GOING TO BE VERY
DIFFICULT TO GET THE EUROPEANS
TO GO ALONG WITH MEANINGFUL
SANCTIONS, AND EVEN IF THEY DO
GO ALONG WITH MEANINGFUL
SANCTIONS, THE FACT IS THAT THE
RUSSIANS HAVE WAYS OF COUNTERING
US.
THE RUSSIANS WILL PUT ENORMOUS
PRESSURE ON UKRAINE AND EVEN
WILL PUT PRESSURE ON THE
EUROPEANS.
THEY HAVE A SECOND STRIKE, SO TO
SPEAK, HERE.
SO WE DON'T HAVE REALLY GOOD
OPTIONS, WHICH IS WHY WE SHOULD
HAVE NEVER GOTTEN INTO THIS MESS
TO BEGIN WITH.
>> Ifill: AMY KNIGHT, WHAT IS
YOUR TAKE ON THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK CLEARLY THE
U.S. IS IN A DIFFICULT POSITION
AND I DO AGREE THAT WE CAN'T
COUNT ON THE EUROPEANS TO BACK
ALL THE ECONOMIC SANCTIONS, BUT
NONETHELESS I THINK PUTIN AND
HIS COLLEAGUES IN THE KREMLIN
PROBABLY ARE NERVOUS ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF HAVING VISAS
DENIED TO RUSSIAN BUSINESSMEN
AND PROBABLY ASSETS FROZEN.
I THINK THE OTHER THING IS PUTIN
SHOWED BY THE EFFORT RUSSIA PUT
INTO THE OLYMPICS -- THEY SPENT
OVER $50 BILLION -- THAT THE
IMAGE OF RUSSIA AND PUTIN
HIMSELF IN THE WEST WAS VERY
IMPORTANT, AND NOW THAT IS
PRETTY MUCH GONE DOWN THE DRAIN
BECAUSE OF THIS RECENT INCURSION
INTO CRIMEA.
>> Ifill: JOHN MEARSHEIMER, AS
YOU LOOK INTO THIS SITUATION
TODAY, WE HEARD JOHN KERRY USE
THE WORD "DEESCALATE."
IS IT TOO LATE POR FOR THAT?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK SO.
EVERYBODY HAS A DEEP-SEATED
INTEREST IN TRYING TO DEESCALATE
THE CRISIS AND GO BACK TO THE
STATUS QUO ANTE.
WE CERTAINLY DON'T WANT A WAR OR
SEE UKRAINE PARTITIONED OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
WHAT WE WOULD LIKE TO DO IS HAVE
AN ELECTION THIS COMING MAY IN
THAT COUNTRY, GET A GOVERNMENT
IN PLACE THAT IS NEITHER
ANTI-RUSSIAN OR TERRIBLY
PRO-RUSSIAN AND CREATE A
SITUATION WHERE WE DON'T HAVE
ANY SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES WITH
THE RUSSIANS OVER UKRAINE.
AND I THINK, IN ADDITION TO
THAT, WHAT WE ALSO HAVE TO DO IS
WE HAVE TO STOP TALKING ABOUT
NATO EXPANSION.
I THINK IT'S AN IMPORTANT
BACKDROP TO THIS WHOLE CRISIS.
SINCE THE END OF THE COLD WAR,
THE UNITED STATES AND THE WEST
EUROPEANS HAVE BEEN PUSHING NATO
FURTHER AND FURTHER EASTWARD,
AND THIS JUST DRIVES THE
RUSSIANS CRAZY.
IT'S PRECIPITATED, IN MY
OPINION, THE 2008 WAR BETWEEN
GEORGIA AND RUSSIA, AND I THINK
WHAT'S GOING ON HERE IS THAT THE
RUSSIANS ARE BASICALLY SAYING --
AND HERE WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
PUTIN -- THAT THERE'S NO WAY
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO TOLERATE A
SITUATION WHERE THE UNITED
STATES INSTALLS A PRO-WESTERN
REJEEJ IN UKRAINE AND THEN
EVENTUALLY BRINGS UKRAINE INTO
NATO.
THAT'S SIMPLY UNACCEPTABLE.
>> Ifill: THAT'S A BASIC
QUESTION.
HAS THE U.S. MISCALCULATED,
OVERREACHED IN SUPPORTING NATO
EXPANSION IN UKRAINIAN
INDEPENDENCE?
>> I DON'T THINK SO,
PARTICULARLY REGARDING THE
UKRAINE, I DON'T THINK THE U.S.
INSTALLED A GOVERNMENT IN
UKRAINE.
UKRAINIANS WERE VERY EMPHATIC
THAT THEY WERE UNHAPPY WITH THE
YANUKOVICH GOVERNMENT.
IT'S TERRIBLY -- IT WAS TERRIBLY
CORRUPT AND A GOOD NUMBER OF
RA TIES,
ECONOMIC TIES WITH EUROPE.
SO I DON'T THINK THE U.S. CAN BE
BLAMED FOR THAT.
AND I THINK THAT RUSSIA AND THE
KREMLIN REALLY UNDERESTIMATED
THE REACTION THAT WOULD COME
FROM THEIR MOVING INTO CRIMEA.
I DON'T THINK IT WAS SUCH A WISE
THING, EVEN THOUGH IT'S QUITE
CLEAR THAT PUTIN'S MOTIVATION
WAS TO SHOW THAT RUSSIA DOES NOT
TOLERATE EASILY WHAT IT
PERCEIVES OF AS THE WEST AND THE
U.S., IN PARTICULAR, TRYING TO
INFLUENCE EVENTS IN STATES THAT
WERE FORMERLY A PART OF THE
SOVIET UNION.
>> Ifill: MOST AMERICANS
WATCHING THE OLYMPICS AND THE
CHINESE-SOCHI SPECTACLE A FEW
WEEKS AGO WERE PUZZLED PUTIN
WOULD MAKE THIS EFFORT TO
TARNISH HIS REPUTATION SO
QUICKLY.
IS THERE SOMETHING BEHIND THIS
THAT MADE THIS INEVITABLE?
>> MOST AMERICANS HAVE BEEN
SHOCKED AT WHAT HAPPENED.
IT'S SO CLEAR THE WHITE HOUSE
AND MOST EXPERTS IN WASHINGTON
HAVE BEEN SHOCKED.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY THEY HAVE
BEEN SHOCKED.
THE FACT IS THAT PUTIN AND THE
RUSSIANS MORE GENERALLY HAVE
MADE IT CLEAR THAT THEY WILL NOT
TOLERATE ON THEIR BORDERS A
UKRAINE OR A GEORGIA THAT IS
PRO-WESTERN AND LEANING TOWARDS
JOINING NATO.
THEY'RE VERY CLEAR ON THIS, AND
WE DID NOT, BY OURSELVES,
ENGINEER THE COUP IN KIEV,
THAT'S FOR SURE, BUT THERE'S NO
QUESTION THAT THE AMERICANS WERE
GIVING ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE
REBELLIOUS FORCES, AND THAT
HELPED TOPPLE THE GOVERNMENT.
FROM A RUSSIAN POINT OF VIEW,
THIS IS SIMPLY UNACCEPTABLE.
UKRAINE IS A CORE STRATEGIC
INTEREST, AND THE FACT THAT MOST
AMERICANS DON'T UNDERSTAND THAT
IS AMAZING TO ME.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU THIS,
AMY, IS IT TOO LATE AT THIS
POINT IF THERE IS AN ESCALATION
POSSIBLE, IS IT TOO LATE TO
RETURN TO SOME STATUS QUO PLACE
FOR UKRAINE WHERE, INDEED,
VLADIMIR PUTIN STEPS BACK, A NEW
GOVERNMENT IS IN PLACE AND WE GO
BACK TO WHERE WE WERE BEFORE
THIS LATEST HOSTILITY?
>> WELL, I'M NOT SURE WHETHER
IT'S POSSIBLE IN THE NEAR FUTURE
TO HAVE RUSSIA WITHDRAW ITS
TROOPS THAT WERE BROUGHT IN
RECENTLY TO CRIMEA.
BUT IT SEEMED PRETTY CLEAR TO ME
FROM PUTIN'S PRESS CONFERENCE
THAT HE IS CLEARLY BACKING DOWN
FROM THE IDEA OF FURTHER
INCOURAGENS IN EASTERN UKRAINE,
FOR EXAMPLE, AND I THINK THAT'S
REALLY BEEN THE MAIN CONCERN OF
THE U.S. AND ITS EUROPEAN
ALLIES.
THAT WOULD REALLY START A BLOOD
BATH AND A CIVIL WAR, AND I
THINK, RIGHT NOW, FOR THE TIME
BEING, WE CAN BE PRETTY MUCH
ASSURED THAT RUSSIA WON'T BE
TAKING THOSE KIND OF STEPS.
WHEN AND IF IT WILL BE FOR
CONCILIATORY AND STEP OUT OF
CRIMEA, THAT'S ANOTHER QUESTION,
AND I THINK, AS WE SEE, NOBODY
REALLY KNOWS WHETHER THAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN OR NOT AND HOW
FAR THE UNITED STATES WILL PRESS
RUSSIA IN THAT DIRECTION.
>> Ifill: AMY KNIGHT, JOHN
MEARSHEIMER, THANK YOU BOTH SO
MUCH FOR YOUR INCIVIL RIGHTS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THE U.S.,
THE RELEASE OF THE PRESIDENT'S
BUDGET TODAY TOUCHED OFF A FRESH
ROUND OF DEBATE IN WASHINGTON
ABOUT SPENDING PRIORITIES.
MR. OBAMA CALLED ON LAWMAKERS TO
SUPPORT INVESTMENTS THAT WOULD
HELP CREATE JOBS.
BUT REPUBLICANS SAID THE PLAN
SPENDS TOO MUCH, AND WOULD HURT
THE ECONOMY.
>> Woodruff: IN BOXES AND ON
DOLLIES, THE 2015 FISCAL YEAR
BUDGET BLUEPRINT ARRIVED AT THE
CAPITOL THIS MORNING, WHILE
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS DESCRIBING
IT AS BALANCED AND RESPONSIBLE
IN A VISIT TO A WASHINGTON D.C.
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL.
>> IT'S A ROAD MAP FOR CREATING
JOBS, WITH GOOD WAGES AND
EXPANDING OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL
AMERICANS.
THE NEARLY $4 TRILLION PNLA
ALSO SERVES AS A KIND OF
PLATFORM FOR DEMOCRATS IN
NOVEMBER'S CONGRESSIONAL
ELECTIONS.
IT INCLUDES NEW SPENDING FOR
EXPANDED PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION,
JOB-TRAINING AND PUBLIC WORKS.
AND IT EXPANDS THE EARNED INCOME
TAX CREDIT FOR LOW-WAGE WORKERS
WHILE SEPARATELY ADDING MORE
THAN $1 TRILLION IN HIGHER TAXES
OVER THE NEXT DECADE.
>> THIS BUDGET GIVES MILLIONS
MORE WORKERS THE OPPORTUNITY TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE TAX
CREDIT, AND IT PAYS, IT PAYS FOR
IT BY CLOSING LOOPHOLES LIKE THE
ONES THAT LET WEALTHY
INDIVIDUALS CLASSIFY THEMSELVES
AS A SMALL BUSINESS TO AVOID
PAYING THEIR FAIR SHARE OF
TAXES.
>> Woodruff: MR. OBAMA WITHDREW
LAST YEAR'S OFFER TO SLOW DOWN
INCREASES IN SOCIAL SECURITY
BENEFITS.
BUT, THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS THE
PLAN ADES BIBY SPENDING LIMITS
IN LAST DECEMBER'S BUDGET
COMPROMISE.
>> AND AT A TIME WHEN OUR
DEFICIT'S BEEN CUT IN HALF, IT
ALLOWS US TO MEET OUR
OBLIGATIONS TO FUTURE
GENERATIONS WITHOUT LEAVING THEM
A MOUNTAIN OF DEBT.
>> Woodruff: THE 2015 DEFICIT
WOULD DECLINE, TO $560 BILLION,
BUT REPUBLICANS TODAY SAID THE
RED INK, SPENDING HIKES AND TAX
INCREASES MEAN THE PLAN IS DEAD
ON ARRIVAL.
SENATE MINORITY LEADER MITCH
MCCONNELL.
>> RATHER THAN PUT TOGETHER A
CONSTRUCTIVE BLUEPRINT THE TWO
PARTIES COULD USE AS A JUMPING
OFF POINT, TO GET OUR ECONOMY
MOVING AND OUR FISCAL HOUSE IN
ORDER, THE PRESIDENT HAS ONCE
AGAIN OPTED FOR THE POLITICAL
STUNT FOR A BUDGET THAT'S MORE
ABOUT FIRING UP THE BASE IN AN
ELECTION YEAR THAN ABOUT SOLVING
THE NATION'S BIGGEST AND MOST
PERSISTENT LONG-TERM CHALLENGES
>> Woodruff: CONGRESSMAN PAUL
RYAN, THE HOUSE BUDGET CHAIR,
LIKEWISE CALLED THE OBAMA PLAN A
DISAPPOINTMENT.
IN A STATEMENT, HE SAID:
>> Woodruff: RYAN OFFERED AN
EXTENSIVE CRITIQUE YESTERDAY OF
FEDERAL ANTI-POVERTY EFFORTS.
HE'S EXPECTED TO RELEASE A
REPUBLICAN BUDGET PROPOSAL IN
THE COMING WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: SOME OF THE MORE
NOTABLE PIECES OF THE
PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL, AND
EXPECTED TO SHOW UP IN THE
REPUBLICAN ALTERNATIVE, ARE THE
DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO POVERTY,
INEQUALITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY.
WE CONTRAST THOSE PERSPECTIVES
OURSELVES.
JAMES CAPRETTA IS A SENIOR
FELLOW AT THE ETHICS AND PUBLIC
POLICY CENTER.
HE SERVED AS ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR
OF THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND
BUDGET UNDER PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH.
AND ROBERT GREENSTEIN IS THE
FOUNDER AND DIRECTOR OF THE
CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY
PRIORITIES.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
BOB GREENSTEIN, THE PRESIDENT
SAID IN HIS STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS HE WANTED CONGRESS TO
REVERSE THE TIDES OF INCOME
EQUALITY WHICH HE SAID DEEPENED
IN THIS COUNTRY.
DOES HE DO SO IN THE BUDGET AND,
IF SO, HOW?
>> HE DOES DO IT TO SOME DEGREE
BUT THERE ARE LIMITS TO WHAT
GOVERNMENT CAN DO THERE THAT HE
MAKES A PRETTY SOLID EFFORT.
WHAT HE DOES IS HE RAISES MONEY
BOTH BY CUTTING SOME
LOWER-PRIORITY SPENDING AND
RAISING SOME REVENUES,
PARTICULARLY THROUGH A SERIES OF
MEASURERS TO CURB LOOPHOLES USED
PARTICULARLY BY VERY HIGH-INCOME
PEOPLE TO AVOID PAYING TAXES THE
REST OF US PAY.
HE USES SOME OF THAT MONEY FOR
DEFICIT REDUCTION, BUT HE USES
SOME OF IT FOR A SERIES OF
INVESTMENTS.
SOME SHOULD HAVE OPPORTUNITY
BROADLY, INCLUDING
INFRASTRUCTURE, EDUCATION,
TRAINING AND SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH, BUT SOME IS TARGETED
ON ENCOURAGING OPPORTUNITY FROM
PEOPLE LOW ON THE INCOME
SPECTRUM THROUGH THINGS SUCH AS
EXPANDED WAGE SUPPLEMENT,
EARNED-INCOME CREDIT FOR VERY
LOW-WAGE WORKERS AND SIGNIFICANT
INVESTMENTS IN PRE-SCHOOL
EDUCATION AND EARLY HIGH-QUALITY
EDUCATION FOR CHILDREN FROM
LOW-INCOME FAMILIES WHO
OTHERWISE START SCHOOL WHY
WHINED THEIR PIERCE.
>> JIM CAPRETTA, WHAT DO YOU
THINK THE PRESIDENT IS DOING OR
NOT DOING TO CLOSE THE GAP?
>> I THINK THE BUDGET IS AIMED
AT A POLITICAL STATEMENT, NOT A
LEGISLATIVE CHANGE.
I DON'T THINK THERE IS A CHANCE
THE MANY PROPOSALS WILL BE
ENACTED.
IT'S A POLITICAL ARGUMENT THE
DEMOCRATS CAN CARRY INTO THE
NOVEMBER ELECTION.
THE WHITE HOUSE ALL BE ADMITTED
THAT'S THEIR AIM WITH THIS KIND
OF BUDGET.
BACK TO THE ISSUE OF INEQUALITY.
THERE IS A MISUNDERSTANDING OF
HOW INEQUALITY CAME ABOUT AND
WHETHER OR NOT IT AFFECTS PEOPLE
ON THE LOW END.
INEQUALITY HAPPENED BECAUSE WE
HAVE A GLOBAL ECONOMY AND IF
SOMEONE FINDS A NEW IDEA OR
RESEARCH EFFORT OR SOMETHING
THAT'S INNOVATIVE, YOU CAN DO
VERY, VERY WELL IN THIS COUNTRY
IF YOU'RE A PART OF THAT.
DOES THAT COME AT THE EXPENSE OF
PEOPLE AT THE LOW END?
NO.
THERE HAVE BEEN MANY, MANY
ECONOMIC STUDIES THAT HAVE SHOWN
THAT JUST BECAUSE SOMEBODY AT
THE HIGH END IS DOING BETTER
THAT DOESN'T COME AT THE EXPENSE
OF THE LOW END.
SO THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL IS
REALLY A PRESCRIPTION FOR THE
WRONG PROBLEM.
SECONDLY, EVEN IF IT WAS THE
RIGHT PROBLEM, THE AMOUNT OF
MONEY WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THAT
HE'S REDISTRIBUTING FROM PEOPLE
ON THE HIGH END TO THE LOW END
IS VERY, VERY MINOR GIVEN OUR
ECONOMY AND WHAT THE ISSUE IS.
SO I DON'T THINK IT WILL HAVE
MUCH OF AN EFFECT BECAUSE IT
WON'T HAVE A CHANCE OF PASSAGE
AND IS AIMED AT THE WRONG
PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: I WANT YOU TO
RESPOND TO THAT, BOB GREENSTEIN,
AND I WANT YOU TO GET TO WHAT
THE PARTIES MIGHT BE ABLE TO
COME TOGETHER ON THIS YEAR.
>> THIS IS JUST A POLITICAL
STATEMENT BECAUSE IT ISN'T GOING
TO PASS THIS YEAR.
PAUL RYAN'S BUDGET ISN'T GOING
TO PASS THIS YEAR EITHER.
NOTHING MUCH IS GOING TO PASS
THIS YEAR.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT'S THE
OBAMA OR THE RYAN BUDGET, WHICH
I DON'T AGREE WITH MUCH IN IT,
IT DOESN'T MEAN EITHER BUDGET IS
NOTHING BUT A POLITICAL
STATEMENT AND SHOULD BE IGNORED.
BOTH BUDGETS SET FORTH A FIRM
VISION FOR A YEAR-ROUND DEBATE
BECAUSE SIGNIFICANT DECISIONS
ARE COMING STARTING IN 2015, I
THINK.
>> Woodruff: OKAY.
LET'S TALK ABOUT WHAT DO YOU SEE
IN HERE, JIM CAPRETTA, WHEN YOU
SEE THE TWO PARTIES WORKING
TOGETHER?
>> THERE'S ONE POSSIBILITY.
I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH OF A
CHANCE, BUT AROUND THE EARNED
INCOME TAX CREDIT, THERE'S MORE
BIPARTISAN SUPPORT FOR THAT KIND
OF AN APPROACH TO WAGE
SUPPLEMENTS THAN IT IS FOR JUST
REDISTRIBUTING THROUGH TAXING
AND SPENDING.
EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT IS A
PROGRAM THAT BOB KNOWS WELL THAT
PROVIDES ADDITIONAL SUPPORT
DIRECTLY THROUGH THE FEDERAL TAX
SYSTEM TO PEOPLE WHO ARE
ACTUALLY WORKING, HAVE A JOB AND
BOOSTS THEIR INCOME DIRECTLY TO
THE PROPORTION OF END AGES.
IT'S THE KIND OF THING THAT
COULD BE BUILT ON.
IT'S BETTER THAN DOING, FRANKLY,
A MINIMUM WAGE INCREASE.
>> I THINK WE NEED TO DO BOTH
THE MINIMUM WAGE INCREASE AND
EARNED INCOME CREDIT.
YOU CAN'T DO THE WHOLE THING
THROUGH THE EARNED INCOME
CREDIT, IT PUTS TOO MUCH STRAIN
ON GOVERNMENT FINANCES.
YOU CAN'T DO THE WHOLE THING
THROUGH THE MINIMUM WAGE, THAT
PUTS TOO MUCH STRAIN ON
EMPLOYERS.
BUT I THINK JIM IS RIGHT, THERE
IS A POTENTIAL HERE FOR EVEN
ANOTHER REASON.
THE PRESIDENT IS PROPOSING TO
INCREASE THE EARNED INCOME
CREDIT FOR WORKERS NOT LIVING
WITH MINOR CHILDREN.
A SIZABLE EARNED INCOME CREDIT
FOR FAMILIES WITH KIDS.
>> Woodruff: RIGHT.
YOU HAVE YOUNG RKERWOS OR
MIDDLE-AGE WORKERS WHO IS SINGLE
INDIVIDUALS, IF THEY PAY NO
WAGES, FOR THOSE WHO ARE IN
POVERTY OR DEEPER INTO POVERTY,
THAT SHOULD BE SOMETHING WHERE
BOTH PARTIES SAY THAT'S NOT A
GOOD IDEA AND BOTH PARTIES WANT
TO ENCOURAGE THEM TO WORK FOR
AND EARNED INCOME CREDIT DOES
THAT.
>> Woodruff: YOU SEE
REPUBLICANS MOVING IN THE
PRESIDENT'S DIRECTION, HAVING
MORE INTEREST IN DOING SOMETHING
LIKE THIS?
>> I WOULDN'T SAY THAT.
I THINK IN THE AREA OF EARNED
INCOME TAX CREDIT, THERE MIGHT
BE SOME OVERLAP.
BUT IN GENERAL THE REPUBLICAN
APPROACH WILL BE VERY DIFFERENT,
I THINK.
I THINK THEY'LL LOOK AT THE
RANGE OF PROGRAMS AIMED AT
HELPING THE POOR AND SAY A LOT
OF THESE PROGRAMS HAVE BEEN
CREATED WITHOUT ANY RELATIONSHIP
OR UNDERSTANDING OF HOW THEY
INTERACT WITH THE OTHERS AND
CREATE LARGE DISINCENTIVES TO
WORK WHEN YOU STACK THEM ALL
TOGETHER.
LOTS OF STUDIES HAVE SHOWN WHEN
YOU PAY SOMEONE A BENEFIT AND
WITHDRAW IT WHEN THE EARNINGS
RISE, IN A SENSE YOU PROVIDE ADD
DISINCENTIVE FOR PEOPLE TO MOVE
UP THE WAGE LADDER.
SO YOU STACK ALL THESE THINGS
TOGETHER AND SOME PEOPLE ARE
LOSING 80% OR MORE OF THEIR
ADDITIONAL EARNINGS WHEN THEY
GET A BETTER-PAYING JOB.
I THINK REPUBLICANS ARE WORKING
HARD AT THAT IN TRYING TO GET
THE WORK INCENTIVES RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: TO BORE IN FOR A
SECT ON THE EARNED INCOME TAX
CREDIT, WHAT'S THE POINT AT
WHICH YOU SEE THE TWO SIDES
COMING TOGETHER?
>> THERE'S TWO POSSIBILITIES.
YOU COULD DO IMPROVEMENTS
EXPANSION OF THE EARNED INCOME
CREDIT AS PART OF BIPARTISAN TAX
REFORM, OR YOU COULD DO IT AS
PART OF THE PACKAGE, A
COMPROMISE PACKAGE WITH THE
MINIMUM WAGE.
I'M NOT SURE I SEE EITHER OF
THOSE HAPPENING IN 2013, BUT I
THINK THERE'S A POTENTIAL IN A
SUBSEQUENT YEAR.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU SEE.
I AGREE WITH BOB ON THAT.
I DON'T THINK MUCH WILL HAPPEN
IN 2014.
>> Woodruff: EVEN ON THIS?
EVEN ON.
THIS IT'S TOO CONTENTIOUS.
BOTH SIDES WILL WANT TO TAKE
THIS TO THE ELECTION IN
NOVEMBER.
AFTER NOVEMBER, THERE IS A
POSSIBILITY, EVEN AROUND A
LOW-INCOME AGENDA, THERE MIGHT
BE SOME MODEST AGREEMENTS.
>> Woodruff: ALL RIGHT.
WE'LL LEAVE IT THERE.
THANK YOU BOTH.
JIM CAPRETTA, ROBERT GREENSTEIN.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AS AMERICAN
INVOLVEMENT, INCLUDING MULTIPLE
DEPLOYMENTS, IN AFGHANISTAN AND
IRAQ WINDS DOWN, A RECENT AND
DISTURBING TREND IS DRAWING NEW
ATTENTION, AN INCREASE IN THE
RATE OF ARMY SUICIDES.
AND NEW RESEARCH SHOWS SOLDIERS
MAY BE AT GREATER RISK EVEN
BEFORE THEY ENLIST.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE.
>> Brown: THE WORK WAS PUBLISHED
IN A SERIES OF PAPERS IN "JAMA
PYSCHIATRY," AND DONE BY
INDEPENDENT RESEARCHERS, FUNDED,
IN PART, BY THE ARMY.
AMONG THE KEY FINDINGS:
ONE IN 10 SOLDIERS QUALIFIED FOR
A DIAGNOSIS OF WHAT'S KNOWN AS
INTERMITTENT EXPLOSIVE DISORDER.
THAT RATE IS SIX TIMES HIGHER
THAN IN THE CIVILIAN POPULATION.
SOLDIERS ALSO CAME INTO THE ARMY
WITH A HIGHER RATE OF BEHAVIORAL
DISORDERS SUCH AS SUBSTANCE
ABUSE OR A.D.H.D. THAN
CIVILIANS.
DR. RONALD KESSLER OF HARVARD
MEDICAL SCHOOL IS ONE OF THE
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS.
HE JOINS US NOW.
WELCOME.
FIRST, REMIND US OF THE EXTENT
OF THIS PROBLEM AND WHAT PIECE
OF IT WERE YOU MOST FOCUSED ON?
>> WELL, THE EXTENT OF THE
PROBLEM IS THAT ROUGHLY 18 OUT
OF EVERY 100,000 SOLDIERS COMMIT
SUICIDE EVERY YEAR.
SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT REALLY
STILL QUITE A SMALL NUMBER OF
PEOPLE, BUT IT'S HIGHER THAN THE
CIVILIAN POPULATION, AND I WAS
INVOLVED IN THE PART OF THE
STUDY THAT LOOKED AT SURVEYS TO
TRY TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THE RISK
FACTORS MIGHT BE FOR THESE
SUICIDES.
OF COURSE, THE SUICIDES ARE JUST
THE TIP OF THE ICEBERG.
THERE ARE MANY MORE SUICIDE
ATTEMPTS, MANY MORE PEOPLE
THINKING ABOUT KILLING
THEMSELVES AND LIFE ISN'T WORTH
LIVING AND SO FORTH.
SO THE WHOAG RANGE OF MENTAL
HEALTH OUTCOME.
>> Brown: RESEARCH SHOWS MANY
SOLDIERS SUFFERED FROM MENTAL
ILLNESS BEFORE COMING INTO THE
MILITARY.
EXPLAIN WHAT YOU FOUND.
>> THAT'S TRUE.
THE RATES OF MENTAL ILLNESS
AMONG SOLDIERS IS CONSIDERABLY
HIGHER THAN IN THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION, LOOKING AT PEOPLE
THE SAME AGE, SEX AND EDUCATION.
PART OF THAT IS BECAUSE, WHEN WE
LOOK AT LIFETIME PREVALENCE OF
THESE DISORDERS, SOME PEOPLE WHO
ARE SOLDIERS TODAY HAD HIGHER
RATES OF DISORDERS THAN THE
CIVILIAN POPULATION EVEN BEFORE
THEY CAME INTO THE ARMY AND THEY
ARE SUBSTANCE DISORDERS,
A.D.H.D., INTERMITTENT EXPLOSIVE
DISORDER YOU MENTIONED.
WHAT WE THINK OF AS IMPULSIVE
ANGER KIND OF DISORDERS.
IN COMPARISON TO ANXIETY MOOD
DISORDERS AND BASIC SUICIDALITY
WERE NOT HIGHER AMONG SOLDIERS
THAN THE REST OF THE POPULATION
PRIOR TO TIME THEY ENTERED THE
MILITARY.
>> Brown: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN
THEY ENTER THE MILITARY?
WHAT THEY BROUGHT WITH THEM
MIXES WITH OTHER RISK FACTORS.
WERE YOU ABLE TO LOOK AT
SPECIFIC CASES AND TO SEE
EXACTLY WHAT TRIGGERED SUICIDE
OR SUICIDAL THOUGHTS?
>> YEAH, WELL, THERE'S A
COMBINATION OF THINGS.
THERE ARE THE THINGS THEY COME
WITH, THESE IMPULSIVE, ANGER
KIND OF THINGS.
AND THEN ONCE THEY GET IN THE
ARMY, THE RATES OF ANXIETY
DISORDERS, POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS
DISORDERS AND DEPRESSION
INCREASE, AND IT'S A COMBINATION
OF BOTH SIGNS OF DISORDERS
STRONGLY ASSOCIATED WITH
SUICIDALITY.
WE FIND THE MAJORITY OF SOLDIERS
WHO ARE SUICIDAL TODAY HAVE BEEN
ACCOUNTED FOR BY THIS PROFILE OF
MULTIPLE EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS.
SOME THEY BROUGHT IN ADVANCE AND
SOME THEY ACQUIRED AFTER
ENTERING THE ARMY.
>> Brown: SO ONE OBVIOUS
QUESTION IS HOW MUCH SCREENING
TAKES PLACE FOR NEW RECRUITS AND
WHAT DO YOUR FINDINGS SUGGEST
ABOUT WHAT SHOULD HAPPEN?
>> RIGHT.
WELL, YOU CAN'T JOIN THE ARMY IF
YOU HAVE A SERIOUS MENTAL
DISORDER, IF YOU'VE HAD A
SUICIDE ATTEMPT IN THE PAST,
YOU'RE NOT ALLOWED TO JOIN THE
ARMY.
IF YOU'RE SCHIZOPHRENIC OR HAVE
OTHERCIES DUREDDER.
HOWEVER, WE DON'T HAVE A
NATIONAL REGISTRY FOR THESE
THINGS AND THE QUESTIONS ARE
PRETTY MUCH JUST ASKING PEOPLE
TO REPORT WHETHER THEY'VE HAD
THESE PROBLEMS AND IF THEY SAY
NO, EVEN THOUGH THEY HAVE,
THERE'S NOT MUCH THAT WE CAN DO
TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THAT.
WE DON'T HAVE ANY OBJECTIVE
TESTS FOR THE PRESENCE OF MENTAL
DISORDERS IN THE WAY WE DO BLOOD
PRESSURE OR A THERMOMETER OR
BLOOD TESTS OR THINGS OF THAT
SORT.
>> Brown: THAT'S WHAT I WAS
WONDERING.
DO ANYTHING IN THE FINDINGS HELP
IDENTIFY THOSE WHO MAY BE MORE
LIKELY TO MAKE SUICIDE ATTEMPTS?
>> WELL, AS I SAID, YOU KNOW,
THE MAIN THING, THE PEOPLE WHO
MAKE SUICIDE ATTEMPTS ARE NOT
SURPRISINGLY PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MENTAL DISORDERS.
AND THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS
ARE MENTAL DISORDERS.
BUT IF THE ISSUE THAT REMAINS IS
IS THERE SOMETHING WE CAN DO TO
FIGURE OUT HOW NOT TO HAVE
PEOPLE WITH MENTAL DISORDERS
JOIN, PROBABLY NOT.
THE REASON IS, A LOT OF PEOPLE
IN THE U.S. HAVE SOME KIND OF
HISTORY OF MENTALLE DISORDER.
PROBABLY 40 OR 50% OF THE
POPULATION AT SOME TIME HAS HAD
SOME TYPE OF MENTAL THEY'RE PSY.
YOU COULD HAVE THE COMMON COLD
DISORDERS, A FEAR OF DOGS, SMALL
SPACES, SPEAKING IN PUBLIC OR
AFTER YOU LOSS A JOB OR BROKE UP
WITH A GIRLFRIEND MAYBE YOU WERE
DEPRESSED FOR SIX WEEKS OR SO,
THERE ARE ALL KINDS OF MENTAL
DISORDERS.
IF YOU WERE TO EXCLUDE ALL OF
THOSE PEOPLE, THERE WOULDN'T BE
MANY PEOPLE LEFT TO JOIN THE
ARMY.
SO I THINK IT'S NOT PRACTICAL TO
THINK IN TERMS OF EXCLUDING ALL
THOSE KIND OF FOLKS.
>> Brown: I WAS ASKING IN PART
ABOUT EXCLUDING BUT, ALSO, ONCE
PEOPLE ARE RECRUITED AND IN THE
ARMY, ARE THERE THINGS THE
MILITARY COULD DO BETTER, ONCE
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED AS
HAVING SOME SORT OF PROBLEMS AS
THEY COME IN, TO DEAL WITH THE
KIND OF RISK FACTORS THAT YOU
TALKED ABOUT THAT COME WITH THE
MILITARY?
>> YES.
THE MILITARY DOES AN
EXTRAORDINARY JOB OF GETTING
PEOPLE THE TREATMENT AFTER THEY
HAVE BEEN EXPOSED TO TRAUMA AND,
IN FACT, THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN
THE MILITARY WITH MENTAL
DISORDERS WHO ARE GETTING
TREATMENT IS HIGHER THAN THE
PROPORTION OF THE POPULATION
WITH THE SAME DISORDERS WHO GET
TREATMENT.
SO ADDRESSING THE PROBLEMS OF
STIGMA AND EMBARRASSMENT AND SO
FORTH, THE MILITARY HAS DONE AN
EXTRAORDINARY JOB.
I THINK ONE THING THAT HAS
CAUGHT ALL OF US BY SURPRISE
WITH THESE NEW FINDINGS IS HOW
MANY PEOPLE CAME IN THEY
HAD ANY EXPOSURE TO TRAUMATIC
MILITARY EXPERIENCES WITH
PROBLEMS THAT SUBSEQUENTLY WERE
DEEMED TO BE IMPORTANT AND THERE
I THINK IT'S MORE CHALLENGING.
WE KNOW FROM OTHER STUDIES OF
DISASTERS, AFTER HURRICANE
KATRINA, AFTER 9/11, MANY PEOPLE
CAME INTO TREATMENT FOR
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH THOSE
THINGS, BUT, IN FACT, A LOT OF
THOSE PEOPLE TURNED OUT TO HAVE
PROBLEMS THAT WERE PREEXISTING.
THE QUESTION IS HOW TO GET
PEOPLE TO COME IN BEFORE THEN.
>> Brown: RONALD KESSLER OF
HARVARD UNIVERSITY, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: WE WILL BE RIGHT
BACK WITH A LOOK AT AN
INITIATIVE ADDING DIVERSITY TO
THE HIGH TECH INDUSTRY.
BUT FIRST, THIS IS PLEDGE WEEK
ON P.B.S.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON THE AIR.
PATH TO SUCCESS IN THE HIGH TECH
WORLD FOR DISENFRANCHISED
STUDENTS.
LAST WEEK, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED A NEW INITIATIVE TO
HELP LEVEL THE PLAYING FIELD FOR
YOUNG MEN OF COLOR.
IN OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, ONE
PROGRAM IS ALREADY UNDERWAY.
AARTI SHAHANI OF K.Q.E.D. IN SAN
FRANCISCO REPORTS.
>> OKAY, IT DIDN'T SAY AFTER THE
THIRD ELEMENT.
>> Reporter: THESE TEENAGERS
SPEND HOURS GLUED TO THEIR
COMPUTER SCREENS.
BUT THEY'RE NOT PLAYING GAMES OR
IN
THEY'RE STUDYING SOMETHING
THEY'RE NOT TAUGHT AT SCHOOL:
COMPUTER CODING.
THEY'RE PICKING UP PYTHON AND
HTML-5 AND RUBY ON RAILS.
JOHNNEL WHITE IS A SOPHOMORE AT
VALLEJO HIGH.
>> IT'S A NEW LANGUAGE.
YOU LEARN, LIKE YOU'RE LEARNING
SPANISH BUT YOU'RE LEARNING
SOMETHING ELSE OTHER THAN
SPANISH.
AND LETTERS AND NUMBERS AND
SYMBOLS AND ALL OTHER STUFF.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE HIDDEN
GENIUS PROJECT, A SMALL NON-
PROFIT THAT'S WORKING TO RECRUIT
YOUNG BLACK MEN INTO THE HIGH
TECH SECTOR.
IT'S ONE OF THE FEW PARTS OF THE
ECONOMY THAT'S BOOMING AND
ACHING FOR DIVERSITY.
>> THE BOYS HAVE TO APPLY TO THE
PROGRAM AND IF ACCEPTED, THEY
COMMIT TO CLASSES TWICE A WEEK
IN OAKLAND.
BRYON MUCCULAR IS A SOPHOMORE AT
SALESIAN HIGH SCHOOL IN
RICHMOND.
HE HAD HOPED FOR A FOOTBALL
CAREER.
THEN A KNEE INJURY PUT HIM ON
THE SIDELINES.
>> I DIDN'T THINK I'D BE DOING
ANYTHING IN LIFE AND THIS COMES
ALONG, HIDDEN GENIUS PROJECT,
AND IT JUST OPENED, I JUST SAW
IT OPEN DOORS FOR ME.
>> Reporter: BRYON LIVES WITH
HIS GRANDPARENTS, WHO REALLY
LIKE WHAT HE'S DOING, BUT DON'T
QUITE GET IT.
DELORES MURRAY IS HIS
GRANDMOTHER.
>> I DON'T HAVE ANY INKLING WHAT
CODING IS.
>> Reporter: MURRAY DOES
UNDERSTAND THAT ITS A PROMISING
STEP.
INSTEAD OF JUST PLAYING VIDEO
GAMES, HER GRANDSON COULD END UP
MAKING THEM, FOR MONEY.
>> IT HAS BEEN A REAL GOOD THING
FOR A TEENAGE YOUNG MAN WHO IS
TRYING TO DO THE RIGHT THING.
HE IS TRYING TO STAY OUT OF THE
STREETS.
TRYING TO GET GOOD GRADES.
HE HAS ALL THIS GOING FOR HIM
AND THEN HIDDEN GENIUS COMES
ALONG, JUST KIND OF ADDS A
LITTLE MORE GEL TO THE PUDDING,
SO THAT IT, YOU KNOW, IT KIND OF
SETS.
>> Reporter: A FEW WEEKENDS AGO,
THE HIDDEN GENIUS STUDENTS SPENT
THREE DAYS WORKING NON-STOP TO
BUILD GAMES AND MOBILE APPS.
IT WAS THEIR VERY FIRST HACK-A-
THON, ONE FOR BLACK MALE
ACHIEVEMENT.
AND BEHIND IT IS KALIMAH
PRIFORCE.
PRIFORCE, NOW A TECH
ENTREPRENEUR, STARTED IN A VERY
DIFFERENT PLACE.
HE GREW UP IN FOSTER CARE.
AND WHILE HE FOUND A WAY OUT,
HIS LITTLE BROTHER DID NOT.
>> THE SYSTEM, REDUCED A LOT OF
HIS OPPORTUNITIES TO PURSUE HIS
OWN DREAMS.
HE ACTUALLY WANTED TO BE A
COMPUTER SCIENTIST.
SO HE STAYED IN THE GROUP HOME
SYSTEM UNTIL HE WAS 18 AND THEN
HE AGED OUT AND HE WAS KILLED A
COUPLE OF MONTHS LATER.
SO THAT WAS WHEN I DECIDED TO
FOCUS ON BECOMING AN EDUCATOR.
>> Reporter: HACK-A-THONS ARE
ABOUT GENERATING IDEAS AND
PROTOTYPES, FAST.
THE BEST IDEAS MAKE IT TO
MARKET, BUT THAT'S LATER.
TODAY, THE FOCUS IS ON MOBILE
APPS THAT HELP TEENS DEAL WITH
EVERYDAY PROBLEMS, LIKE WHAT TO
EAT, AND WHETHER TO SHOW UP TO
SCHOOL.
BRYON AND HIS GROUP ARE WORKING
ON A DO-IT-YOURSELF ADVENTURE
GAME ABOUT DECISION-MAKING.
JOHNNELS TEAM IS CREATING A
FITNESS APP, WITH A CARTOON BIRD
THAT GETS SLIMMER THE MORE THE
USER EXERCISES.
>> HOW MANY SHOULD WE DO?
ONE JUMPING JACK?
>> FIVE?
TEN?
>> Reporter: EACH TEAM HAS TECH
PROFESSIONALS COACHING THE
STUDENTS.
>> WE WAS LIKE WE NEED CODERS,
WE NEED DESIGNERS, WE NEED A LOT
OF PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: OAKLAND IS A STONES
THROW AWAY FROM SILICON VALLEY,
AND COMPANIES LIKE THE MUSIC,
STREAMING SITE PANDORA HAVE SET
UP SHOP HERE.MMUNITY IS LARGELY-
AMERICAN, THE START-UP WORKFORCE
IS NOT.
>> SOME OF THESE KIDS THEY COULD
BE CONSIDERED MISFITS, THEY
COULD BE CONSIDERED
DISADVANTAGED, AND ALL OF THESE
WEIRD TERMS.
BUT I LIKE TO PREFER TO SEE THEM
AS LOW OPPORTUNITY YOUTH.
>> AND WE ARE TRAILBLAZERS!
>> Reporter: AT THE END OF THE
WEEKEND, EACH GROUP MUST PITCH
THEIR IDEAS TO EACH OTHER.
AND A PANEL OF JUDGES.
>> HOW DID YOU REACH OUT TO GET
INPUT?
>> Reporter: HACK-A-THON FUNDER
MITCH KAPOR HAS INVESTED OVER A
MILLION DOLLARS IN THE OAKLAND
START-UP SCENE THIS LAST YEAR
ALONE.
HE SAYS THE EAST BAY IS FULL OF
UNTAPPED POTENTIAL AND MAYBE
EVEN THE NEXT BILLION-DOLLAR
COMPANY.
>> I'VE ALWAYS BEEN LOOKING
AROUND CORNERS.
SO WI ARTED IN
PERSONAL COMPUTERS IN 1978,
NOBODY TOOK THEM SERIOUSLY, AND
WHEN I STARTED LOOKING AT
INVESTING IN INTERNET COMPANIES
IN 1993, NOBODY TOOK IT
SERIOUSLY.
SO THIS REALLY ISN'T ANY
DIFFERENT.
>> Reporter: BLACK AND LATINO
KIDS SPEND PLENTY OF TIME USING
TECHNOLOGY, BUT THE HIDDEN
GENIUS PROJECT WANTS TO SEE
CONSUMERS BECOME PRODUCERS, AND
SEE THAT DIVERSITY REFLECTED IN
HIGH-TECH PRODUCTS.
TAKE VIOLENCE ON THE STREETS.
>> I BELIEVE THAT IF WE WANT TO
BUILD AN APP THAT COULD HAVE
SAVED TRAYVON MARTINS LIFE ONE
OF THE BEST APPROACHES, IS TO
MAKE SURE THAT TRAYVON MARTIN IS
ABLE TO BUILD THAT APP FOR
TRAYVON MARTIN.
>> Reporter: AS EXCITING AS IT
IS, A HACK-A-THON IS SHORT-
LIVED.
IT'LL TAKE A LOT OF CODING, AND
PROGRAMS LIKE THE HIDDEN GENIUS
PROJECT, TO REALLY CHANGE THE
GAME.
>> I LIVE IN SOUTH VALLEJO AND
ITS GHETTO EVERYDAY.
A LOT OF PEOPLE STAND OUTSIDE,
AND I CHOSE TO CODE AND COME TO
HIDDEN GENIUS BECAUSE I WANTED
TO GET AWAY FROM THAT.
WITH THIS APP, WE CAN MAKE
BETTER DECISIONS AND MAYBE IN
THE FUTURE I THINK WE CAN CHANGE
THE WORLD WITH THIS GAME.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
PLAYED DOWN TENSIONS WITH
UKRAINE, BUT ALSO SAID HE
RESERVES THE RIGHT TO USE FORCE
TO DEFEND ETHNIC RUSSIANS.
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA ROLLED OUT A
NEARLY $4 TRILLION BUDGET.
REPUBLICANS SAID IT WAS A NON-
STARTER.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, WE MARK FAT
TUESDAY WITH THE HISTORY OF ONE
OF THE MOST INFAMOUS TOURIST
RITUALS AT MARDI GRAS IN NEW
ORLEANS.
AND FIND ALL OF OUR VICE WEEK
REPORTING, FROM THE SCIENCE OF
SLOTH TO BETTING WITH BITCOINS.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, MILES O'BRIEN'S
SECOND REPORT FROM THE CRIPPLED
FUKUSHIMA NUCLEAR POWER PLANT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF, WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE
AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.